---
layout: post
title:  "Staying Safer Online"
date:   2022-05-21
excerpt: "You can't eliminate every threat, but you can be safer"
image: "/images/pic06.jpg"
---

Staying safe online has been an issue as long as there's been an internet. Although some things have changed, many things have not. 80% of online safety is just thinking about what you put online, who and what you trust online, as well as some basic password management. This guide is focused on the most basic things you can do, such as regularly checking what others can see about you, verifying that you're talking to who you think you're talking to, never reusing passwords, and using two factor authentication (2fa). Without further ado, let's get started.

## Who knows what about me, and how do they know?
Seeing what's publically available about you online can be as simple as googling your username. This isn't everything out there about you, but it's a simple way to start if you have a unique enough username. Googling yourself occasionally lets you know what other people can figure out about you easily. If you find something that could potentially dox you, you can either attempt to remove the content from the website serving it, or you can ask Google to take down the search result by [following these instructions](https://support.google.com/websearch/troubleshooter/3111061#ts=2889054). The information will still be available on the website hosting it, but it won't show up in Google's search results. There are plenty more sources of information you can use that are similarly freely available, some of which I will describe below. Looking for your username or information with some of these tools can help you understand what people can find out about you.

#### What is OSINT?
OSINT stands for Open Source Intelligence. What that means is gathering information from sources that are publicly available. Even something as simple as googling yourself, as described above, is open source intelligence. There are many more sources that are more complicated, but it can be that easy to gather.

#### Reverse Image Search
Posting the same image from multiple accounts can be a good way for people to connect the dots between accounts. For example, posting a picture you posted on Facebook or Instagram in Discord can lead people to from Discord to your Facebook or Instagram via a reverse image search. Some examples of reverse image search sites are [https://images.google.com](https://images.google.com), [https://tineye.com/](https://tineye.com/), and [https://yandex.com/images/](https://yandex.com/images/). The image doesn't need to be the same size to show up in a reverse image search, but they usually do have to have the same proportions, so the ways to defeat a reverse image search include cropping part of the image so the proportions don't match, flipping the image, rotating slightly then cropping the image, and other similar transformations of the image. Sometimes, these are even sufficient to trick image classification neural networks, but things like adversarial images are ever better at tricking things like that. We won't get into that topic today, though.

#### EXIF data in images
Common image formats like JPEG, PNG, TIFF, and others make room within the image file for information about the image. This space is called Exchangeable Image File, or EXIF for short. Different cameras store different information, for example, a DSLR camera might store information about the camera's model, the lens, focal distance, color correction, contrast, and so on. Some cameras have GPSes so you can see where your photos were taken. Your phone might store your phone's model, your Apple username, along with some of the same things that a DSLR camera stores like color and contrast information. If you want to look at an image's EXIF data, you can upload images to [https://exif.tools](https://exif.tools), or there are likely software libraries for your favorite programming language if you want to access this data programatically. For safety, most social media websites strip this information after uploading your image, and prior to displaying your image, however it's good to assume that EXIF data is preserved if you're not completely sure. Discord didn't strip EXIF data on images until 2 years ago. Parler never stripped EXIF data, and when all images uploaded became public, all location data associated with those images was still attached, which helped to implicate numerous people involved in January 6th in Washington DC. Even if the social media service strips EXIF data, know that the company who you're providing data to likely mines this data and preserves it for their own purposes. Stripping this data yourself can be as simple as taking a screenshot of the image you want to share instead of sharing it directly. Again, there's probably a library for your favorite programming language which can also allow you to strip or spoof data more directly, but it's easy enough to just take a screenshot of your picture, no need to make it complicated.

#### Sherlock
Sherlock is a tool for identifying users across multiple platforms. Think of it as a search engine for usernames. You can find the source code for the tool at [https://github.com/sherlock-project/sherlock](https://github.com/sherlock-project/sherlock). Clone the repo, create a virtualenv, and install dependencies in your venv. Once you've set up the necessary dependencies, you can run Sherlock from the command line, by running `python3 sherlock/sherlock.py <username>`. It should start listing accounts as soon as you hit enter. You can search multiple usernames at the same time just by adding them at the end of that command, so if you want to search for some variations on user account names without running Sherlock more than once, you can.

#### Other OSINT sources
There are plenty more sources of information. Some other sources you can use are outlined in the link below:

[https://github.com/jivoi/awesome-osint](https://github.com/jivoi/awesome-osint)

## Foiling Corporate data collection
While the previous section was more focused on knowing what information is publicly available about you, this will be more focused on the information you give to companies for free, and how to reduce your footprint. Some of the things I've talked about above are important to remember for this section as well, such as EXIF data and reverse image searches to correlate your accounts, but much more important is 3rd party cookies and other web resources tracking you on behalf of websites you're not on.

#### Ad Blockers
Ad companies are notorious for their unscrupulous business practices. They're often the first users of new tracking 

#### Other Privacy Extensions
 - Privacy Badger is an extension from the EFF that blocks known trackers from websites you use. This prevents those 3rd parties from collecting data on what websites you browse.
 - A User Agent Randomizer (there are several browser extensions that fit this bill) randomizes your user agent string. This is a piece of information that tells websites what operating system and browser you are using to access their website. This used to be useful when different browsers behaved differently given the same HTML or Javascript, but now that most browsers are standardized onto the same behavior, this doesn't do anything but tell the server information they don't need about who you are. Similarly, your browser dimensions don't need to be sent to the server, now that client-side CSS has relative spacing. Sometimes (actually, pretty frequently) user agents, browser dimensions, and other factors are so unique that only one person matches that criteria. This is why it's important to hide this information, otherwise tracking cookies aren't necessary, people can just use website logs to correlate your visit to a website with a visit to another website.

## Username safety
Picking a username is a necessary part of being online. This is how people will know you and refer to you, so it's important to pick a username you like, that tells other people as little about you as possible. A popular format for email usernames is to put your first initial and last name and your birthday as numbers after your first and last. This is not advisable, as it can tell anyone quite a lot about you, especially if you have an uncommon enough first and last name.

## Password safety
A lot of password safety discussion is around password complexity. Passwords should be fairly complex, but they should be memorable. Unsurprisingly, there are several relevant XKCD comics: https://xkcd.com/936/ https://xkcd.com/792/ 

#### Never reuse passwords
This is fairly common sense, but never use the same password between websites. Usually, when a website leaks passwords, they're hashed. Usually it's very difficult to correlate a hash with its original inputs, but it's sometimes possible for common passwords. At minimum, if password hashes are leaked, attackers will be able to correlate the hash with other leaked hashes, and use that to identify that you're the same person on both accounts.

#### Password managers
So if you're never going to reuse passwords, how do you remember all your passwords? The answer is that you do not. You entrust a password manager with your passwords. A password manager is a notebook or piece of software where you put your passwords. Physically writing your passwords down may seem counterintuitive, but so long as you keep your notebook in a safe place (e.g. in a safe that only you have the key to), it's safer than using a piece of software. The convenience of software is very high, though. Most password managers these days sync your passwords between your computer and your phone, so you don't have to open your notebook and search for passwords. I won't recommend any, but there's plenty of comparison blog posts out there about password managers.

#### Have I been pwned?
[https://haveibeenpwned.com/](https://haveibeenpwned.com/) is a website that collates breach data to tell people if they have been included in a breech. Give them your email or a domain, and they will tell you if that email or domain has been subject to a breech. It's run by one dude, rather than by a corporation or foundation, and it's not monetized, so this is still relatively trustworthy.

#### 2 factor authentication
2 factor authentication is a way of verifying that you are who you say you are through the use of something you know, like a username and password, and something you have, like a phone or hardware 2fa token. More mature websites offer this and encourage users to enable it, usually through adding a phone number so they can text you a security code. Unfortunately, phones are often subject to SIM jacking and fraud attempts through attackers by calling the phone service provider and asking them to port a phone number. This renders text message 2fa relatively insecure. If a website has an option to use a different factor for 2fa, email is safer. There are also apps like Google Authenticator and Microsoft Authenticator which, as apps on your phone, are not subject to SIM jacking and are therefore much safer. Most password managers also have the same functionality as these two apps. Finally, there are hardware 2 factor authentication keys, which are specially designed pieces of hardware that you plug into your computer to provide a second factor. Some common hardware 2fa devices include RSA tokens, Yubikeys, and Google's Titan security key. I have an Onlykey, which has some more functionality than other 2fa keys, but it seems quite a bit less durable than other manufacturers, so I can't recommend it for daily use on your keychain. Keeping it in a locked drawer or safe in your office would probably be fine, though.
